---
title: Structure of source code document
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/07/16
---

# 1. Chapter one : Structure of source document

The design of the Alioth programming language makes the structure of source code document always be well organized and formatted for compiler.

- [1. Chapter one : Structure of source document](#1-chapter-one--structure-of-source-document)
  - [1.1. syntax structures](#11-syntax-structures)
    - [1.1.1. Comments](#111-comments)
    - [1.1.2. Definitions](#112-definitions)
    - [1.1.3. Implementations](#113-implementations)
  - [1.2. Layout of source document](#12-layout-of-source-document)
    - [1.2.1. module signature](#121-module-signature)
    - [1.2.2. others](#122-others)
  - [1.3. Formal format for syntax structures](#13-formal-format-for-syntax-structures)
    - [1.3.1. Rule](#131-rule)
    - [1.3.2. Repeating structure](#132-repeating-structure)
    - [1.3.3. Optionally structure](#133-optionally-structure)
    - [1.3.4. Anchor and reference](#134-anchor-and-reference)

## 1.1. syntax structures

At the top level, there are only three kinds of syntax structures acceptable to write, those are `comments`, `definitions`, `implementations`.

Another kind of syntax structures are called `statements`. They can be written only when the context describes an execution stream.

### 1.1.1. Comments

There are two formats of comments ready for use. These syntax structures will be ignored while recognizing source document.

### 1.1.2. Definitions

There are five kinds of definitions existing but only two of them are allowed to become the syntax structure written at the top level, those are class definitions and enumeration definitions.

This is a limitation, because of the conflict between the leading-keywords of implementations and the other definitions, this limitation makes the design of the syntax parser kept simple.

### 1.1.3. Implementations

There are two kinds of implementations defined, those are method implementations and operator implementations.

## 1.2. Layout of source document

At the abstract level, all contents in one source document constructs one **fragment**.

### 1.2.1. module signature

At the very beginning of the source document, there should be a syntax structure named **module signature** written to identify which module this fragment belongs to.

There should be one and only one module signature, which is used to identify the module this source document belongs to and describe the dependencies of the module.

### 1.2.2. others

Other syntax structures can be written after the module signature. Like definitions, implementations or comments.

Although there is no need to keep contents formatted in some certain order, we suggest that definitions and implementations should be written separated in two different document. Because the major reason why the Alioth programming language keeps the concept of definition and implenmentation different from each other is to provide a method to publish libraries with definitions only but no algorithm in detail.

## 1.3. Formal format for syntax structures

Generally we use the `BNF` or `EBNF` to express formal format for syntax structures, here we introduce a format designed base on `EBNF` to describe our syntax structures.

### 1.3.1. Rule

One rule consists of one or several syntax structure names and a syntax expression, an equal sign should be used to connect these two part, and all rule end up with a semicolon. If there are more than one syntax structure names, they are separated with comma.

~~~ebnf
one rule, Any rule = syntax name ++ ",", "=", syntax rule, ";";
~~~

In the expression, each sub expression are combined with comma.

### 1.3.2. Repeating structure

To express that one structure can be repeatedly written, the common `EBNF` style modifiers are available. Some new modifiers are designed to face the special common question when designing a programming language.

- `*` means the structure before this midifier can be written any times.
- `+` means the structure before this modifier can be written one or more times.
- `{n,m}` means the structure before this modifier can be written at least n times and up to m times.
- `++` means the structure before this modifier can be written one or more times, and they are separated by the structure right following this modifier.
- `[& ... ]` means the structure inside can be written any times, but must not match the same pattern each time.

### 1.3.3. Optionally structure

The structures optional is enclosed by square brackets.

### 1.3.4. Anchor and reference

Parentheses are used to package group, parentheses with a anchor specifier can be used to construct an anchor.Use the hashtag to refer one anchored structure.

For example:
~~~ebnf
anchor example = "module", (:mn Label), "is a module named ", #mn ;
~~~