---
title: Module signature
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/07/27
---

# 2. Chapter two: Module signature & dependency descriptor

The module signature connects all source documents at the abstract level, which belong to the same module. In this page, we talk about the module signature and the dependency descriptor.

- [2. Chapter two: Module signature & dependency descriptor](#2-chapter-two-module-signature--dependency-descriptor)
  - [2.1. Module signature](#21-module-signature)
    - [2.1.1. Module name](#211-module-name)
    - [2.1.2. Entry sign](#212-entry-sign)
  - [2.2. Dependency descriptor](#22-dependency-descriptor)
    - [2.2.1. Package name](#221-package-name)
    - [2.2.2. Alias](#222-alias)
  - [2.3. Relationship between modules](#23-relationship-between-modules)

## 2.1. Module signature

Module signature consists of a header and optionally a series of dependency descriptors.

Each time a space is scanned, all module signatures will be read and analysed to detect the module layout in this abstract space. This information will be cached and uesed to speed up the compiling process.

The formal format for the `module signature` as follow:

~~~ebnf
module signature = "module", module name, ["entry" entry name], [":" dependency descriptor*, [";"] ];
module name, entry name = label ;
~~~

### 2.1.1. Module name

The expression `label` above refers to a lexical rule, which describes how alioth accepts names of abstract units; For more lexical rules check `appendix A`.

If exists, the `transparent class` should be named as the module name, that's why the module name should be a `label`. 

### 2.1.2. Entry sign

The `entry name` is used to find the `entry method` within the `transparent class`, again, that's the reason why the `entry name` should be a `label`.

## 2.2. Dependency descriptor

The dependency descriptor can be used to describe relationship between modules, each dependency descriptor describes one dependency of this module.

Dependency descriptor consists of three parts, the last two are optional.

- `dependency name` describe the name of the module of which this module depends on.
- `package` describe the package where the dependency come from.
- `alias` introduce a alias for the dependency to resolve the symbol conflict.

The formal format for the `dependency descriptor` as follow:

~~~ebnf
dependency descriptor = dependency name, ["@" package name], ["as" alias] ;
dependency name = label;
package name = label | literal string | literal character ;
alias = ("this", "module") | label;
~~~

### 2.2.1. Package name

Since the package name can be any string acceptable to file system, Alioth gives three different ways to describe the package name.

- `label`: fit to simple package name.
- `literal character`: fit to complicated package name.
- `literal string`: fit to complicated package name with compiler variable.

To bring compiler variable, use the format `${` and `}` to enclose variable name in the literal string.

### 2.2.2. Alias

There two kinds of alias of dependency you can specify. The most common one is a `label`, just choose a name you like and remember it when you want to refer to this dependency.

The second one, combined keyword `this module` is used to emit `abstract syntax tree combination`. That's a mechanism makes you be able to use the contents of the dependency just like that they were contents of this module. Which means that the module scope name prefixe is no longer needed.

## 2.3. Relationship between modules

All dependency descriptors of one module will be collected and analysed together, no matter how many source documents are they come from.

Use modules as node, dependency relationship as edges, we can construct a directed graph of relationship among modules. The length of every path in this graph is restricted.