doc/Alioth: book of design/5.chapter five.md, before:

---
title: Method
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/08/29
---

# 5. Chapter five: Method

There are two concepts to describe the executable code fragments, one is called "function", the other is called "method".

Well the concept of "function" sounds that the result won't change if the arguments don't change. In multi-task environment, it's not quite easy to make that true all the time, so we choose the other concept "method".

- [5. Chapter five: Method](#5-chapter-five-method)
  - [5.1. Method definition](#51-method-definition)
    - [5.1.1. Atomic method](#511-atomic-method)
    - [5.1.2. Parameter definitions](#512-parameter-definitions)
    - [5.1.3. Return prototype](#513-return-prototype)
  - [5.2. Method implementation](#52-method-implementation)
  - [5.3. Quasi method](#53-quasi-method)
    - [5.3.1. Quasi parameter](#531-quasi-parameter)
    - [5.3.2. Quasi return type](#532-quasi-return-type)

## 5.1. Method definition

Any method callable has to be defined, the formal format of method definition as follow:

~~~ebnf
method definition = "method", [& method definition modifier ], method name, parameter definition list, return prototype ;
method definition modifiers = "public"|"protected"|"private"|"const"|"atomic"|"meta";
method name = ["$"], label;
parameter definition list = "(", parameter definition++",", ")";
~~~

Again, there's no need to suffix a terminator character such as a semicolon to explicitly declare the end of the definition.

Example:

~~~
class File {
    method public close() void
}
~~~

### 5.1.1. Atomic method

The modifier `atomic` is used to declare that this method cannot be interrupted by other process.

### 5.1.2. Parameter definitions

Parameters are elements initialized at the very beginning of the calling by the caller. The formal format as follow:

~~~ebnf
parameter definition = [element type], ["const"], parameter name, [type expression] ["=", expression ];
element type = "obj"|"ptr"|"ref"|"rel";
parameter name = label;
~~~

Example:

~~~
class File {
    method meta public Open( const fileName string ) ref File
}
~~~

You may bundle the default value of the parameter using the operator `=`.

The parameter definition is a kind of element prototype definition, but the some parts are optional.

The element type is optional because sometimes, the compiler can reduct the element type according to the type expression.

As you maybe already noticed that the type expression after the parameter name is optional also. This is because of the concept of `quasi method`, we'll talk about it soon enough.

### 5.1.3. Return prototype

The return value in the Alioth programming language is an element also, so the type of the return value is an element prototype. The formal format as follow:

~~~ebnf
return prototype = [element type], ["const"], [type expression];
~~~

If the compiler can reduct the element type for the return value, you can omitted the element type.

If the type expression is omitted, the method will be compiled as an `quasi method`.

## 5.2. Method implementation

To implement a method, you have to write a syntax structure named `method implementation` at the top scope.

The formal format of the method implementation as follow:

~~~ebnf
method implementation = "method", [& method implementation modifier ], class name, method name, parameter list, return prototype, method body;
method implementation modifier = "const";
class name = name expression;
method name = label;
parameter list = "(", parameter++"," , ")";
parameter = [element type], ["const"], parameter name, [type expression];
method body = "{" statement* "}";
~~~

Not all method definition modifiers are necessary to be written in the method implementation, so the set of the method implementation modifier is different from the method definition modifier set.

The second difference between the definition and the implementation is that the parameter in the implementation cannot be followed by a default value, because this will cause conflict with the parameter definition.

Example:

~~~
method Hello main( argc int32, argv **int8 ) int32 {

}
~~~

## 5.3. Quasi method

The concept of `quasi` in the Alioth programming language has a series of usages :

* `quasi method`
* `quasi operator`
* `quasi lambda`

To use those parameters without data type defined, you can use the syntax structure named `assume statement` to construct a context where the data type is assumed to be something known. We'll talk about the `assume statement` in the future. For now, we just need to know that it is sort of look like branch.

### 5.3.1. Quasi parameter

One executable object accepts parameters, one or more of the parameters have unknown data type, then the object is called `quasi`.

The mechanism to implement the `quasi method` and the `quasi operator` are the same, which is called `static quasi parameter`. The mechanism to implement the `quasi lambda` is another, which is called `dynamic quasi parameter`.

The `static quasi parameter` mechanism excludes the `assume branch`s which are impossible to be executed. So it's a zero-runtime-cost mechanism.

In the contrary, the `dynamic quasi parameter` mechanism have no right to modify machine-code in executable object, so, it generates a selecting action to match the data type with the `assume statement`, the cost of this mechanism is more like the cost of the `switch` statement in the C programming language.

### 5.3.2. Quasi return type

One executable object returns element without data type specified, this object is called `quasi`.

The mechanism to implement this kind of `quasi method` or `quasi operator` even the `quasi lambda` are all the same one, which is called `quasi return mechanism`.

The `quasi return mechanism` divide the progress of returning an element into two steps.

The first step, is preparing memory space. The compiler can calculate the maximum of the return element can occupy. Before calling that method, the compiler create an available memory space in the stack, which is big enough to store the biggest return element. The starting address pointer of this memory space will be passed into the method via an additional parameter.

The second step, when returning element, the quasi method use the memory space just created to construct the return element, and return an integer as the data type id via the real return object. This integer will be used by the `assume statement` mainly.

According to the architecture of the mechanism to implement the `quasi return type`, if you share your `quasi method` to other language, it won't work properly.

Commit message:

fix some mistakes, add descriptions about `agent`

doc/Alioth: book of design/5.chapter five.md, after:

---
title: Method
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/08/29
---

# 5. Chapter five: Method

There are two concepts to describe the executable code fragments, one is called "function", the other is called "method".

Well the concept of "function" sounds that the result won't change if the arguments don't change. In multi-task environment, it's not quite easy to make that true all the time, so we choose the other concept "method".

- [5. Chapter five: Method](#5-chapter-five-method)
  - [5.1. Method definition](#51-method-definition)
    - [5.1.1. Atomic method](#511-atomic-method)
    - [5.1.2. Parameter definitions](#512-parameter-definitions)
    - [5.1.3. Return prototype](#513-return-prototype)
    - [5.1.4. Raw symbol](#514-raw-symbol)
  - [5.2. Method implementation](#52-method-implementation)
  - [5.3. Quasi method](#53-quasi-method)
    - [5.3.1. Quasi parameter](#531-quasi-parameter)
    - [5.3.2. Quasi return type](#532-quasi-return-type)

## 5.1. Method definition

Any method callable has to be defined, the formal format of method definition as follow:

~~~ebnf
method definition = "method", [& method definition modifier ], method name, parameter definition list, return prototype ;
method definition modifiers = "public"|"protected"|"private"|"const"|"atomic"|"meta"|("raw", [symbol]);
method name = ["$"], label;
parameter definition list = "(", parameter definition++",", ")";
~~~

Again, there's no need to suffix a terminator character such as a semicolon to explicitly declare the end of the definition.

Example:

~~~
class File {
    method public close() void
}
~~~

### 5.1.1. Atomic method

The modifier `atomic` is used to declare that this method cannot be interrupted by other process.

### 5.1.2. Parameter definitions

Parameters are elements initialized at the very beginning of the calling by the caller. The formal format as follow:

~~~ebnf
parameter definition = [element type], ["const"], parameter name, [type expression] ["=", expression ];
element type = "obj"|"ptr"|"ref"|"rel";
parameter name = label;
~~~

Example:

~~~
class File {
    method meta public Open( const fileName string ) ref File
}
~~~

You may bundle the default value of the parameter using the operator `=`.

The parameter definition is a kind of element prototype definition, but the some parts are optional.

The element type is optional because sometimes, the compiler can reduct the element type according to the type expression.

As you maybe already noticed that the type expression after the parameter name is optional also. This is because of the concept of `quasi method`, we'll talk about it soon enough.

### 5.1.3. Return prototype

The return value in the Alioth programming language is an element also, so the type of the return value is an element prototype. The formal format as follow:

~~~ebnf
return prototype = [element type], ["const"], [type expression];
~~~

If the compiler can reduct the element type for the return value, you can omitted the element type.

If the type expression is omitted, the method will be compiled as an `quasi method`.

### 5.1.4. Raw symbol

The Alioth programming language has its own rules to generate binary link symbols for all addressable entities. You maybe need the compiler to generate other symbol for certain entities in some situations. There are two syntax rules available for you to make the compiler generate symbols different.

To make the compiler use the method name to generate binary link symbol just prefix keyword `raw` when defining a method.

Example:

~~~
module Hello

class Hello {

    method printf( int32 ) int32 // symbol: method.Hello.printf$i32
    method raw printf() int32 // symbol: printf
}
~~~

## 5.2. Method implementation

To implement a method, you have to write a syntax structure named `method implementation` at the top scope.

The formal format of the method implementation as follow:

~~~ebnf
method implementation = "method", [& method implementation modifier ], class name, method name, parameter list, return prototype, method body;
method implementation modifier = "const";
class name = name expression;
method name = label;
parameter list = "(", parameter++"," , ")";
parameter = [element type], ["const"], parameter name, [type expression];
method body = "{" statement* "}";
~~~

Not all method definition modifiers are necessary to be written in the method implementation, so the set of the method implementation modifier is different from the method definition modifier set.

The second difference between the definition and the implementation is that the parameter in the implementation cannot be followed by a default value, because this will cause conflict with the parameter definition.

Example:

~~~
method Hello main( argc int32, argv **int8 ) int32 {

}
~~~

## 5.3. Quasi method

The concept of `quasi` in the Alioth programming language has a series of usages :

* `quasi method`
* `quasi operator`
* `quasi lambda`

To use those parameters without data type defined, you can use the syntax structure named `assume statement` to construct a context where the data type is assumed to be something known. We'll talk about the `assume statement` in the future. For now, we just need to know that it is sort of look like branch.

### 5.3.1. Quasi parameter

One executable object accepts parameters, one or more of the parameters have unknown data type, then the object is called `quasi`.

The mechanism to implement the `quasi method` and the `quasi operator` are the same, which is called `static quasi parameter`. The mechanism to implement the `quasi lambda` is another, which is called `dynamic quasi parameter`.

The `static quasi parameter` mechanism excludes the `assume branch`s which are impossible to be executed. So it's a zero-runtime-cost mechanism.

In the contrary, the `dynamic quasi parameter` mechanism have no right to modify machine-code in executable object, so, it generates a selecting action to match the data type with the `assume statement`, the cost of this mechanism is more like the cost of the `switch` statement in the C programming language.

The actual parameter list for `dynamic quasi parameter` is quite different. When passing an element, the data type id will be passed together. Because we don't insert data type id into the object.

### 5.3.2. Quasi return type

One executable object returns element without data type specified, this object is called `quasi`.

The mechanism to implement this kind of `quasi method` or `quasi operator` even the `quasi lambda` are all the same one, which is called `quasi return mechanism`.

The `quasi return mechanism` divide the progress of returning an element into two steps.

The first step, is preparing memory space. The compiler can calculate the maximum of the return element can occupy. Before calling that method, the compiler create an available memory space in the stack, which is big enough to store the biggest return element. The starting address pointer of this memory space will be passed into the method via an additional parameter.

The second step, when returning element, the quasi method use the memory space just created to construct the return element, and return an integer as the data type id via the real return object. This integer will be used by the `assume statement` mainly.

According to the architecture of the mechanism to implement the `quasi return type`, if you share your `quasi method` to other language, it won't work properly.
