---
title: Operator & operator overriding
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/09/04
---

# 6. Chapter six: Operator & operator overriding

There are many operators ready for use in the Alioth programming language. And most of them can be overridden. In this chapter, we'll talk about how to define operators for class.

Operators available refer to [Appendix A](Appendix%20A.md#supported-operators).

- [6. Chapter six: Operator & operator overriding](#6-chapter-six-operator--operator-overriding)
  - [6.1. Overridding operators](#61-overridding-operators)
  - [6.2. Generic operators](#62-generic-operators)
    - [6.2.1. Reversely overriding](#621-reversely-overriding)
    - [6.2.2. The isomorphic operator override](#622-the-isomorphic-operator-override)
    - [6.2.3. Generate default operators](#623-generate-default-operators)
    - [6.2.4. Prefix and suffix operators](#624-prefix-and-suffix-operators)
    - [6.2.5. Label for generic operators when defining](#625-label-for-generic-operators-when-defining)
  - [6.3. Special operators](#63-special-operators)
    - [6.3.1. Label for special operators when defining](#631-label-for-special-operators-when-defining)
    - [6.3.2. Delete default operator](#632-delete-default-operator)
    - [6.3.3. Structural constructor](#633-structural-constructor)
    - [6.3.4. List constructor](#634-list-constructor)

## 6.1. Overridding operators

Operator overriding means to generate a new `operator` or to replace an `operator` already existing for a class to assign a new operation to it.

In source code, link objects into expression using operator generates a call to the operator.

The formal format to define an operator as follow:

~~~ebnf
operator definition = "operator", [& operator definition modifier], operator name, [subtitle], parameter list definition, return prototype;
operator definition modifier = "rev"|"ism"|"prefix"|"suffix"|"const"|"public"|"protected"|"private"|"default";
operator name = operator|label;
subtitle = expression;
~~~

Operators are supposed to process light missions, so by default, operators are marked as `atomic process`.

Objects associated by operator are called `operand`. According to the calculating rules, the object firstly calculated is called `master operand`. Other operands, if exist, are called `slave operand`.

When expression consists of objects of basic data type, the compiler select `master operand` and `slave operand` according to operator combination direction.

Once an object of composite data type become an operand, the left most object who has the overridden operator will be treated as master operand.

There are two kinds of operators, `Generic operator` and `Special operator`.

## 6.2. Generic operators

Generic operators are those operators who are not available for use for composite data type by default.

Overriding operators for pointer operation is forbidden.

### 6.2.1. Reversely overriding

To make the operator available for use even if the `host object` is the slave operand, mark the overriding as an `reverse overriding` using the modifier `rev`.

<u>Assignment operators and mono-operand-operators cannot be overridden reversely.</u>

### 6.2.2. The isomorphic operator override

It's not necessary to write it twice, if the algorithm detail of normal override and the reverse override are the same. Use the modifier `ism` to mark the operator definition, compiler will generate override for both direction.

<u>Note, operators those who cannot be overridden reversely are also not allowed to be overridden as `isomorphic override`.</u>

### 6.2.3. Generate default operators

There are some operators on composite data type, these operators has simple algorithm but are not owned by classes by default. You can have the compiler to generate the operator body for you.

Possible definition to generate default operator as follow:

~~~
operator default assign ( ref const this class ) ref this class
operator default assign ( rel this class ) ref this class
~~~

### 6.2.4. Prefix and suffix operators

Some mono-operand-operator can be prefix or suffix of the operand, when overriding those operators, the position of the operator should be described clearly. There are two modifiers for those operators, modifier `suffix` and modifier `prefix`.

### 6.2.5. Label for generic operators when defining

To define an operator for class, you can just use the operator in the definition, or you can use the corresponding label to represent the operator.

One of the purpose why this rule is designed is that some operators has ambiguous written pattern, we need another method to express what operator we really want to override.

Labels for generic operators are listed below:

- mono-operand-operators
  |Operator|Label|Comment|Available Modifier|
  |---|---|---|---|
  ||`negative`|The negative sign||
  |`~`|`bitrev`|Reverse per bit||
  |`++`|`increment`|Self increment|`prefix` `suffix`|
  |`--`|`decrement`|Self decrement|`prefix` `suffix`|
  |`not`||Logical non||
- binary operators
  - assignment operators
    Assignment operators can return elements of type `ref this class` only.
    |Operator|Label|Comment|Available Modifier|
    |---|---|---|---|---|
    |`=`|`assign`|||
    |`+=`|`assign add`|||
    |`-=`|`assign sub`|||
    |`*=`|`assign mul`|||
    |`/=`|`assign div`|||
    |`%=`|`assign mol`|||
    |`<<=`|`assign shl`|||
    |`>>=`|`assign shr`|||
    |`&=`|`assign bitand`|||
    |`|=`|`assign bitor`|||
    |`^=`|`assign bitxor`|||
  - Other binary operators
    |Operator|Label|Comment|Available Modifier|
    |---|---|---|---|
    |`+`|`add`|Arithmetic operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`-`|`sub`|Arithmetic operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`*`|`mul`|Arithmetic operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`/`|`div`|Arithmetic operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`%`|`mol`|Arithmetic operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`&`|`bitand`|Bit operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`|`|`bitor`|Bit operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`^`|`bitxor`|Bit operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`<<`|`shl`|Bit operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`>>`|`shr`|Bit operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`<`|`lt`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`>`|`gt`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`<=`|`le`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`>=`|`ge`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`==`|`eq`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`!=`|`ne`|Relational operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`and`||Logical Operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`or`||Logical Operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`xor`||Logical Operator|`rev` `ism`|
    |`[]`|`index`|Suffix operator||

## 6.3. Special operators

Most `special operators` are operators those who are mandatory for composite data type, other `special operators` are not existing before they are defined.

### 6.3.1. Label for special operators when defining

Most special operators have their own label, and some of them can be written in label only.

|Operator|Label|Comment|Available Modifier|
|---|---|---|---|
|`{...}`|`sctor`|Structural constructor||
|`[...]`|`lctor`|List constructor||
|`{~}`|`dtor`|Destructor||
||`cctor`|Copy constructor||
||`mctor`|Move constructor||
|`as`||Type convert||
|`.`|`member`|Member convert||
|`#`|`aspect`|Aspect locate||
||`move`|Move to GC memory||

### 6.3.2. Delete default operator

For any reason, you may want to forbid some operation on your class, you can delete a default operator using the following syntax:

~~~ebnf
delete operator = "delete", "default", "operator", operator name;
~~~

Possible operators can be deleted are listed below:

|Operator|Label|
|---|---|
|`{...}`|`sctor`|
|`{=}`|`cctor`|
|`{<}`|`mctor`|

Example:

~~~
delete default operator sctor
~~~

### 6.3.3. Structural constructor

In the Alioth programming language, there's no concept of `constructor function`, but we have a series of concepts of `constructor operator` instead.

By default, composite data type has a default `structural constructor` which accepts no parameter. This default `structural constructor` calls default `structural constructor`s for all members.

Overriding any form of `structural constructor` will destroy the default structural constructor generated by compiler. The only `structural constructor` who can be called without parameter will become the `default structural constructor` eventually.

- defining structural constructor

  If you override the `sctor` more than once, the `least parameter name set` cannot be the same.

  Which is means the following two `sctor` **will cause compiling error**.

  ~~~
  operator {...} ( arg1 int32, arg2 int32 = 3, arg3 float32, arg4 bool = false )

  operator sctor ( arg3 int32, arg1 bool, arg5 int8 = 'x' )
  ~~~

  This is because the `sctor` should be called with parameter name explicitly written, so the order of parameters doesn't matter.

- call the structural constructor
  
  The `structural constructing expression` is used to construct an object, it will call the `structural constructor` for object.

  Example:

  ~~~
  obj conn = {HttpConnection|
      Url: "http://dn-ezr.cn",
      Method: Http::GET };
  
  obj comm Comm = {
      name: "COM4”，
      bandrate: 9600,
      stopbit: 1 };
  ~~~

  The `structural constructing expression` is a series of initial pairs enclosed by brackets. Before the initial pairs are written, there should be a name expression which is used to identify the class of the object you are constructing. But, if compiler is able to detect the class, the name expression before the initial pairs will be not necessary.

- implementing the structural constructor
  
  To implement a structural constructor, there are three parts to be finished in the operator body.

  They are **superclass constructing expression**, **member constructing list**, **suffix constructing fragment**.

  Example:

  ~~~
  operator Scope::Class sctor( arg1 Type, arg2 Type, arg3 Type ) {
      {SuperClassA| param:Expr}
      {SuperClassB| param:Expr, param:Expr}
      [class SuperClassC| Expr, Expr, Expr, Expr]

      :: attr : Expr, attr : Expr, attr : Expr ;

      // Do something ...
  }
  ~~~

  In the operator body, these all three parts are optional.

  The `superclass constructing expression` is used to make call to the structural constructor of super classes. If there are some superclasses which is inherited by this class, but there's no `superclass construction expression` written for it, compiler try to call the default structural constructor.

  The `member constructing list` starts from a floating scope operator, and initial pairs for members right following. 

  If there are something you want to deal with after all members are initialized, use a semicolon to end the `member constructing list`, then you can write down some statements.

### 6.3.4. List constructor

List constructor is used to provide an interface to construct objects using the square brackets.

- Defining list constructor

  When calling the list constructor, the name of parameters are omitted so the order of parameters passed does matter.

  The list constructor can be overridden more than once, but the left most parameter list should be different.

  The label of the list constructor is `lctor`, and the origin symbol : `[...]`.

  Example:

  ~~~alioth
  operator [...] ( fmt string, ... args )
  operator lctor ( int fd, fmt string, ... args )
  ~~~

  Although it is up to the developer what the parameter list look like, `Alioth` encourages that developer use the variable argument pack `... args` instead.

- Call the list constructor

  To call the list constructor, just construct object as if it is a `Json-Array`.

  Example:

  ~~~alioth
  var params = [class strings| "--init", "--work", "./hello/" ];
  var proc = execute("alioth", params);
  ~~~

  ~~~alioth
  view.gender.options = ["male", "female", "none"];
  ~~~

- implementing the list constructor

  The operator body has all three same parts as the structural constructor operator body has.